README.md, before:

# GOKG

*aka "Golang kjkrol Geometry"*

**GOKG** is a Go toolkit focused on practical 2D computational geometry.  
It centres on two core primitives — `Vec` for points/directions and axis-aligned bounding boxes (`BoundingBox`) — plus a plane-aware wrapper (`PlaneBox`) that keeps those boxes canonical to a selected plane. `PlaneBox` stores size, fragments, and helper logic so translations, wraps, and clamps obey the plane’s rules without forcing the caller to reimplement them.  
The library also models both finite and cyclic/“infinite” planes, providing operations that classify, intersect, and reconcile geometric entities under each boundary model.  
The focus remains purely on mathematical geometry; rendering or UI concerns live in neighbouring packages.

## PlaneBox boundary handling

- Finite planes clamp plane boxes to the viewport while keeping their size consistent, so
  expansions never bleed beyond the defined world.
- Cyclic planes automatically wrap plane boxes that cross an edge and split them into
  fragments (`Fragments()`) that continue on the opposite side, making toroidal
  worlds easy to model.
- The helper methods `Translate` and `Expand` renormalise plane boxes on every call,
  updating cached fragments and ensuring touch/collision queries remain accurate
  without extra bookkeeping.

## Usage example

This snippet shifts a contiguous `PlaneBox` by `(-1,-1)` across a 10×10 cyclic plane, so the box wraps past the right and bottom edges and automatically splits into the fragments returned by `Fragments()`. The exact situation is illustrated by the plot below.

![PlaneBox wrap fragments](doc/example_plot.svg)

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"

	"github.com/kjkrol/gokg/pkg/geometry"
)

// Demonstrates how shifting a contiguous box beyond the cyclic plane boundary
// causes it to fragment into multiple wrapped pieces and prints those fragments.
func main() {
	cyclicPlane := geometry.NewCyclicBoundedPlane(10, 10)
    box := geometry.NewBoundingBoxAt(geometry.NewVec(0, 0), 2, 2)
	planeBox := cyclicPlane.WrapBoundingBox(box)

	shift := geometry.NewVec(-1, -1)
	cyclicPlane.Translate(&planeBox, shift)

	fragments := planeBox.Fragments()
	if len(fragments) < 3 {
		fmt.Printf("Unexpected fragment count (%d)\n", len(fragments))
		return
	}

	fmt.Printf("New position: %s\n", planeBox)
	if fragment, ok := fragments[geometry.FRAG_RIGHT]; ok {
		fmt.Printf("- Fragment %d: %s\n", geometry.FRAG_RIGHT, fragment)
	}
	if fragment, ok := fragments[geometry.FRAG_BOTTOM]; ok {
		fmt.Printf("- Fragment %d: %s\n", geometry.FRAG_BOTTOM, fragment)
	}
	if fragment, ok := fragments[geometry.FRAG_BOTTOM_RIGHT]; ok {
		fmt.Printf("- Fragment %d: %s\n", geometry.FRAG_BOTTOM_RIGHT, fragment)
	}
	// Output:
	// New position: {(9,9) (10,10)}
	// - Fragment 0: {(0,9) (1,10)}
	// - Fragment 1: {(9,0) (10,1)}
	// - Fragment 2: {(0,0) (1,1)}
}
```

For more scenarios, browse the example-based tests under `pkg/geometry`, which double as runnable documentation.

## Projects using GOKG

- [`gokq`](https://github.com/kjkrol/gokq) — **GOKQ** is a quadtree utility library that relies on `Vec`, `BoundingBox`, and `PlaneBox` operations.
- [`gokx`](https://github.com/kjkrol/gokx) — **GOKX** is a Go library that provides a lightweight experimental framework for 2D graphics applications.

----
*[Contributor Recommendations](docs/Contributor_Recommendations.md)

Commit message:

docs: Explain how the cyclic plane forms a torus

README.md, after:

# GOKG

*aka "Golang kjkrol Geometry"*

**GOKG** is a Go toolkit focused on practical 2D computational geometry.  
It centres on two core primitives — `Vec` for points/directions and axis-aligned bounding boxes (`BoundingBox`) — plus a plane-aware wrapper (`PlaneBox`) that keeps those boxes canonical to a selected plane. `PlaneBox` stores size, fragments, and helper logic so translations, wraps, and clamps obey the plane’s rules without forcing the caller to reimplement them.  
The library also models both finite and cyclic/“infinite” planes, providing operations that classify, intersect, and reconcile geometric entities under each boundary model.  
The focus remains purely on mathematical geometry; rendering or UI concerns live in neighbouring packages.

## PlaneBox boundary handling

- Finite planes clamp plane boxes to the viewport while keeping their size consistent, so
  expansions never bleed beyond the defined world.
- Cyclic planes automatically wrap plane boxes that cross an edge and split them into
  fragments (`Fragments()`) that continue on the opposite side, making toroidal
  worlds easy to model. Conceptually, glue the top edge of the plane to the bottom
  edge, then the left edge to the right; this seam-stitching turns the rectangle into
  the torus shown in the animation below.

  ![Torus](doc/Torus_from_rectangle.gif)


- The helper methods `Translate` and `Expand` renormalise plane boxes on every call,
  updating cached fragments and ensuring touch/collision queries remain accurate
  without extra bookkeeping.

## Usage example

This snippet shifts a contiguous `PlaneBox` by `(-1,-1)` across a 10×10 cyclic plane, so the box wraps past the right and bottom edges and automatically splits into the fragments returned by `Fragments()`. The exact situation is illustrated by the plot below.

![PlaneBox wrap fragments](doc/example_plot.svg)

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"

	"github.com/kjkrol/gokg/pkg/geometry"
)

// Demonstrates how shifting a contiguous box beyond the cyclic plane boundary
// causes it to fragment into multiple wrapped pieces and prints those fragments.
func main() {
	cyclicPlane := geometry.NewCyclicBoundedPlane(10, 10)
    box := geometry.NewBoundingBoxAt(geometry.NewVec(0, 0), 2, 2)
	planeBox := cyclicPlane.WrapBoundingBox(box)

	shift := geometry.NewVec(-1, -1)
	cyclicPlane.Translate(&planeBox, shift)

	fragments := planeBox.Fragments()
	if len(fragments) < 3 {
		fmt.Printf("Unexpected fragment count (%d)\n", len(fragments))
		return
	}

	fmt.Printf("New position: %s\n", planeBox)
	if fragment, ok := fragments[geometry.FRAG_RIGHT]; ok {
		fmt.Printf("- Fragment %d: %s\n", geometry.FRAG_RIGHT, fragment)
	}
	if fragment, ok := fragments[geometry.FRAG_BOTTOM]; ok {
		fmt.Printf("- Fragment %d: %s\n", geometry.FRAG_BOTTOM, fragment)
	}
	if fragment, ok := fragments[geometry.FRAG_BOTTOM_RIGHT]; ok {
		fmt.Printf("- Fragment %d: %s\n", geometry.FRAG_BOTTOM_RIGHT, fragment)
	}
	// Output:
	// New position: {(9,9) (10,10)}
	// - Fragment 0: {(0,9) (1,10)}
	// - Fragment 1: {(9,0) (10,1)}
	// - Fragment 2: {(0,0) (1,1)}
}
```

For more scenarios, browse the example-based tests under `pkg/geometry`, which double as runnable documentation.

## Projects using GOKG

- [`gokq`](https://github.com/kjkrol/gokq) — **GOKQ** is a quadtree utility library that relies on `Vec`, `BoundingBox`, and `PlaneBox` operations.
- [`gokx`](https://github.com/kjkrol/gokx) — **GOKX** is a Go library that provides a lightweight experimental framework for 2D graphics applications.

----
*[Contributor Recommendations](docs/Contributor_Recommendations.md)
